Code Review guidelines (#300)
pagopa/dx: website/docs/guidelines/code-review/principles.md

---
sidebar_label: Principles
sidebar_position: 1
---

# Principles

## Responsibilities of the Pull Request Author
The author of a Pull Request (PR) is responsible for finding the optimal solution and implementing it. The author is responsible for verifying its correct functionality after release.  

> Before requesting a review, the author must ensure that:

Author: not really. when someone [creates a PR in draft mode](https://github.blog/wp-content/uploads/2019/02/draft-pull-requests.png?w=1354), the CODEOWNERS, if any, are not notified about that PR.
if early feedback is required, the author should tag someone asking for help or clarification.

before requesting review means that before the PR is submitted for review, which triggers the notification to the CODEOWNERS.

does this explanation solve your thoughts?

- The issue has been fully resolved
- The solution is implemented in the most appropriate way
- All required criteria have been met

> - No bugs, logical issues, uncovered edge cases, or known vulnerabilities have been left in the code

Author: I'm going to resolve this comment, since I add a [**suggestion** in the PR about PR guidelines](https://github.com/pagopa/dx/pull/293/files#r1981037198)

- The best way to maximize the chances of having a PR approved without excessive iterations is to perform a self-review following the [Contribution Acceptance Criteria](../pull-request/acceptance-criteria.md).

> During the self-review, the author should add comments within the PR to explain decisions, trade-offs, or areas where additional context would help the reviewer understand the code.

Reviewer: deal 👍

## Before Requesting a Review
The author is expected to add comments to notify the reviewers of any important details or areas that require additional explanation or attention, such as:

- The addition of a new library
- Potentially insecure code
- Non-obvious assumptions
### What NOT to Do
Do not add `TODO` comments in the source code unless specifically requested by the reviewer. If a `TODO` comment is added due to a pending task, it should include a reference, like:

```
# TODO: To be removed by https://pagopa.atlassian.net/browse/DX-0000  
```
Do not add comments that simply explain what the code does. If a non-TODO comment is added, it should explain why something was done, not what the code does.

> Do not request a review for a PR if one or more CI checks are failing.

Reviewer: see comment about about draft PRs.

Author: @gunzip I added a note about it. What do you think?

---

> sidebar_label: Principles

Reviewer: principles of what?

sidebar_position: 1
---

# Principles

## Responsibilities of the Pull Request Author

The author of a Pull Request (PR) is responsible for finding the optimal solution and implementing it. The author is responsible for verifying its correct functionality before and after release.  
Before requesting a review, the author must ensure that:

- the issue has been fully resolved
- no bugs, logical issues, uncovered edge cases, or known vulnerabilities have been left in the code
- the best way to maximize the chances of having a PR approved without excessive iterations is to perform a self-review following the [Contribution Acceptance Criteria](../pull-request/acceptance-criteria.md)

During the self-review, the author should add comments within the PR to explain decisions, trade-offs, or areas where additional context would help the reviewer understand the code.

## Before Requesting a Review

The author is expected to add comments to notify the reviewers of any important details or areas that require additional explanation or attention, such as:

- the addition of a new library
- potentially insecure code
- non-obvious assumptions

> ### What NOT to Do

Reviewer: ```suggestion

### What NOT to do within a PR

```

> Do not add `TODO` comments in the source code unless specifically requested by the reviewer. If a `TODO` comment is added due to a pending task, it should include a reference, like:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Do not add `TODO` comments in the source code unless specifically requested by the reviewer. If a `TODO` comment is added due to a pending task, it must include a reference to the corresponding task in the backlog, like:
```

```
# TODO: To be removed by https://pagopa.atlassian.net/browse/DX-0000  
```

> Do not add comments that simply explain what the code does. If a non-TODO comment is added, it should explain why something was done, not what the code does.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Do not add comments that simply explain what the code does. If a non-TODO comment is added, it should explain _why_ something was done, not _what_ the code does.
```

Do not request a review for a PR if one or more CI checks are failing.
If the CI fails but a review is still necessary, make sure to leave a comment explaining the reasons.

> ## Responsibilities of Reviewers

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Responsibilities of PR Reviewers
```

Reviewers are responsible for carefully examining the proposed solution and ensuring that the PR meets all [Contribution Acceptance Criteria](../pull-request/acceptance-criteria.md).

They must also ensure that technical debt is kept under control, carefully evaluating when it makes sense to create follow-up tasks to address any documented debt introduced by the PR.

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

- Accept that many programming decisions are opinions; discuss tradeoffs and reach a resolution quickly
- Ask questions, avoid making demands (e.g. “What do you think about naming this method `fetchHome` instead `getHome`?”)
- Ask for clarification (e.g. “I didn’t understand why this `if` statement is required. Can you clarify?")
- Be explicit: remember people don’t always understand your intentions online
- Be humble
- Consider one-on-one chats or video calls if there are too many “I didn’t understand” or “Alternative solution:” comments. Post a follow-up comment summarizing one-on-one discussion
- If you ask a question to a specific person, always start the comment by mentioning them; this ensures they see it if their notification level is set to “mentioned” and other people understand they don’t have to respond

## PR Author

Keep in mind that code review is a process that can take multiple iterations, and reviewers may spot things later that they may not have seen the first time.

- The first reviewer of your code is you. Before requesting the review, read through the entire `diff`. Does it make sense? Did you include something unrelated to the overall purpose of the changes?

> - Follow the guidelines to compile PR's title and description

Reviewer: **suggestion**: link?

- Don’t take it personally. The review is of the code, not of you

> - Extract unrelated changes and refactorings into future pull requests

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Extract unrelated changes and refactorings into future PRs
```

- Seek to understand the reviewer’s perspective
- Try to respond to every comment

> - The merge request author resolves only the threads they have fully addressed. If there’s an open reply, an open thread, a suggestion, a question, or anything else, the thread should be left to be resolved by the reviewer

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- The PR author can only resolve threads that have been fully addressed. If a comment remains open, it must be left for the comment author to resolve.
```

> - It should not be assumed that all feedback requires their recommended changes to be incorporated into the PR before it is merged. It is a judgment call by the PR author and the reviewer as to if this is required, or if a follow-up issue should be created to address the feedback in the future after the PR in question is merged

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Don't assume that _all_ feedback requires to be incorporated. Consider to address non mandatory suggestions with a follow up, after the PR is merged.
```

> - Request a new review from the reviewer once you are ready for another round of review. Follow the [point `5` of the GitHub guide](https://docs.github.com/en/pull-requests/collaborating-with-pull-requests/proposing-changes-to-your-work-with-pull-requests/requesting-a-pull-request-review#requesting-reviews-from-collaborators-and-organization-members)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Once ready for the next round, request feedback from the reviewer. Follow the [suggestion about requesting a new review from the GitHub guide](https://docs.github.com/en/pull-requests/collaborating-with-pull-requests/proposing-changes-to-your-work-with-pull-requests/requesting-a-pull-request-review#requesting-reviews-from-collaborators-and-organization-members)
```

> ## Reviewer

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## PR Reviewer
```

Understand why the change is necessary (fixes a bug, improves the user experience, refactors the existing code). Then:

- Be as clear as possible to minimize unnecessary review iterations
- Communicate which ideas you feel strongly about and those you don’t; you may use the [conventional comments](conventional-comments.md)
- Identify ways to simplify the code while still solving the problem
- Offer alternative implementations, but assume the author already considered them (“What do you think about using a custom validator here?”)
- Seek to understand the author’s perspective
- Check out the branch, and test the changes locally. Your testing might result in opportunities to add automated tests.

> - If a piece of code is unclear, say so! There’s a good chance someone else would be confused by it as well

Reviewer: **suggestion**: what about something like: ask to comment obscure code lines?
